OCPBUGS#13799: Added a section for manually restoring cluster from etcd backup. (#62735)
openshift/openshift-docs: modules/manually-restoring-cluster-etcd-backup.adoc

// Module included in the following assemblies:
//
// * disaster_recovery/scenario-2-manually-restoring-cluster-etcd-backup.adoc
// * post_installation_configuration/cluster-tasks.adoc

:_content-type: PROCEDURE
[id="manually-restoring-cluster-etcd-backup_{context}"]
= Restoring a cluster manually from an etcd backup

The restore procedure described on the document "Restoring to a previous cluster state": 

* Requires the complete recreation of 2 control plane nodes, which might be a complex procedure for clusters installed with the UPI method, since an UPI installation does not create any MachineSet for the control plane nodes. 
* Uses the script `/usr/local/bin/cluster-restore.sh`, which starts a new single-member etcd cluster, then scales it to 3 members. 

The procedure described in this document, instead:

* Doesn't require to recreate any control plane node.
* Directly starts a 3-members etcd cluster.

> If your cluster uses instead a control plane machine set, it is still suggested to use the "Restoring to a previous cluster state" document for a simpler etcd recovery procedure.

Reviewer: I propose to remove the "your", just add "If the cluster uses". Additionally the sentence doesn't make sense.
Better would be "If the cluster uses the MachineSet for control plane, it is suggested to use...".

Author: Ack.

// Module included in the following assemblies:
//
// * disaster_recovery/scenario-2-manually-restoring-cluster-etcd-backup.adoc
// * post_installation_configuration/cluster-tasks.adoc

:_content-type: PROCEDURE
[id="manually-restoring-cluster-etcd-backup_{context}"]
= Restoring a cluster manually from an etcd backup

> You can use a saved etcd backup to restore a previous cluster state or restore a cluster that has lost the majority of control plane hosts. The procedure described below only uses the already existing control plane nodes.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
You can use a previously saved etcd backup to restore a prior cluster state or restore a cluster that has lost the majority of control plane hosts. The procedure described below only uses the already existing control plane nodes.
```

Author: Ack.

> If your cluster uses a control plane machine set, see "Troubleshooting the control plane machine set" for a simpler etcd recovery procedure.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The procedure described below doesn't require to recreate any control plane node.
If your cluster uses instead a control plane machine set, see "Troubleshooting the control plane machine set" for a simpler etcd recovery procedure.
```

Author: Ack.

> When you restore your cluster, you must use an etcd backup that was taken from the same z-stream release. For example, an {product-title} 4.7.2 cluster must use an etcd backup that was taken from 4.7.2.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```

Author: Ack.

> [NOTE]

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion

```

====

> The standard restore procedure requires the complete recreation of 2 control plane nodes, which might be complex for clusters installed with UPI, since an UPI installation does not create any MachineSet for the control plane nodes.  It also uses the script `/usr/local/bin/cluster-restore.sh`, which starts a new single-member etcd cluster, then scales it to 3 members. The procedure described in this guide, instead, directly starts a 3-members etcd cluster.

Author: Ack.

====

.Prerequisites

> * Access to the cluster as a user with the `cluster-admin` role.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* Access to the cluster as a user with the `cluster-admin` role; for example, the `kubeadmin` user
```

Author: ACK.

> * A healthy control plane host to use as the recovery host.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```

Author: Ack.

> * SSH access to _all_ control plane hosts.

Author: Ack.

> * All control plane hosts can be accessed through SSH using the root user. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```

Author: Ack.

> * A backup directory containing both the etcd snapshot and the resources for the static pods from the same backup. The file names in the directory must be in the following formats: `snapshot_<datetimestamp>.db` and `static_kuberesources_<datetimestamp>.tar.gz`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* A backup directory containing both a previous etcd snapshot and the resources for the static pods from the same backup. The file names in the directory must be in the following formats: `snapshot_<datetimestamp>.db` and `static_kuberesources_<datetimestamp>.tar.gz`.
```

Author: Ack.

.Procedure

> . Select a control plane host to use as the recovery host. This is the host that you will run the restore operation on.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```

Author: Ack.

> . Select a control plane host to use as the recovery host. This is the host that you will run the restore operation on.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```

> . Use SSH to connect to each of the control plane nodes, including the recovery host.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
. Use SSH to connect to each of the control plane nodes.
```

Author: Ack.

+
The Kubernetes API server becomes inaccessible after the restore process starts, so you cannot access the control plane nodes. For this reason, it is recommended to use a SSH connection for each control plane host you are accessing in a separate terminal.
+
[IMPORTANT]
====
If you do not complete this step, you will not be able to access the control plane hosts to complete the restore procedure, and you will be unable to recover your cluster from this state.
====

> . Copy the etcd backup directory to the recovery control plane host.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
. Copy the etcd backup directory to a control plane host.
```

Author: Done

Author: Done the changes as per the latest comment below.

> . Copy the etcd backup directory to the recovery control plane host.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
. Copy the etcd backup directory to each control plane host.
```

Author: Done.

+

> This procedure assumes that you copied the `backup` directory containing the etcd snapshot and the resources for the static pods to the `/home/core/` directory of your recovery control plane host.

Author: Ack.

. Stop the static pods on all the control plane nodes; one host at a time.

.. Move the existing Kubernetes API Server static pod manifest out of the kubelet manifest directory.
+
[source,terminal]
----
$ sudo mv /etc/kubernetes/manifests/kube-apiserver-pod.yaml /tmp
----

.. Verify that the Kubernetes API Server containers have stopped with the command:
+
[source,terminal]
----
$ sudo crictl ps | grep kube-apiserver | grep -v "operator|gaurd"
----
+
The output of this command should be empty. If it is not empty, wait a few minutes and check again.

.. If Kubernetes API Server containers haven't stopped yet, force their termination with the command:
+
[source,terminal]
----
$ sudo crictl stop <container_id>
----

.. Repeat the same steps for `kube-controller-manager-pod.yaml`, `kube-scheduler-pod.yaml` and **eventually** `etcd-pod.yaml`.

> .. On each control plane host, move the current `etcd` data into the `backup` folder:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
. On each control plane host, move the current `etcd` data into the `backup` folder:
```

Author: Added the step.

> .. On each control plane host, move the current `etcd` data into the `backup` folder:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
.. On each control plane host, save the current `etcd` data moving it into the `backup` folder:
```

+
[source,terminal]
----
$ sudo mv /var/lib/etcd/member /home/core/assets/backup/
----
+
This data will be useful in case the `etcd` backup restore doesn't work and the `etcd` cluster must be restored to the current state.

. Find the correct etcd parameters for each control plane host.

> .. The value for `<ETCD_NAME>` is related to the current host, and it is equal to the value of the `ETCD_NAME` variable in the manifest `/etc/kubernetes/static-pod-resources/etcd-certs/configmaps/restore-etcd-pod/pod.yaml` file in the current host. It can be found with the command:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
.. The value for `<ETCD_NAME>` is unique for the each control plane host, and it is equal to the value of the `ETCD_NAME` variable in the manifest `/etc/kubernetes/static-pod-resources/etcd-certs/configmaps/restore-etcd-pod/pod.yaml` file in the specific control plane host. It can be found with the command:
```

Author: Ack.

+
[source,terminal]

> ----

Reviewer 2: The whole block might be simplified with this analogous command:
```
cat /etc/kubernetes/static-pod-resources/etcd-certs/configmaps/restore-etcd-pod/pod.yaml | \
  grep -A 1 $(grep 'export ETCD_NAME' /etc/kubernetes/static-pod-resources/etcd-certs/configmaps/restore-etcd-pod/pod.yaml | grep -Eo 'NODE_.+_ETCD_NAME') | \
  grep "value" | \
  grep -Po '(?<=value: ").+(?=")'
```

> $ grep -A 1 \

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
$ cat /etc/kubernetes/static-pod-resources/etcd-certs/configmaps/restore-etcd-pod/pod.yaml | \
```

>   $(grep 'export ETCD_NAME' /etc/kubernetes/static-pod-resources/etcd-certs/configmaps/restore-etcd-pod/pod.yaml | sed -E 's/.*\{(.*)\}/\1/g') \

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  $(grep 'export ETCD_NAME' /etc/kubernetes/static-pod-resources/etcd-certs/configmaps/restore-etcd-pod/pod.yaml | grep -Eo 'NODE_.+_ETCD_NAME') \
```

  /etc/kubernetes/static-pod-resources/etcd-certs/configmaps/restore-etcd-pod/pod.yaml | \
  grep "value" | \
  sed -E 's/.*\"(.*)"/\1/g'

> ----

Reviewer 2: The whole block might be simplified with this analogous command:
```
cat /etc/kubernetes/static-pod-resources/etcd-certs/configmaps/restore-etcd-pod/pod.yaml | \
  grep -A 1 $(grep 'export ETCD_NAME' /etc/kubernetes/static-pod-resources/etcd-certs/configmaps/restore-etcd-pod/pod.yaml | grep -Eo 'NODE_.+_ETCD_NAME') | \
  grep "value" | \
  grep -Po '(?<=value: ").+(?=")'
```

Reviewer 2: Unfortunately we can't use `jq`, since the file is a yaml and not a json.

> .. The value for `<UUID>` can be generated with the command:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
.. The value for `<UUID>` can be generated in a control plane host with the command:
```

Author: Done

+
[source,terminal]
----
$ uuidgen
----
+
[NOTE]
====

> Note that `<UUID>` must be generated only once and the same value must used on all the control plane hosts.

Author: Ack.

====

.. The value for `ETCD_NODE_PEER_URL` should be set like the following example:
+
[source,yaml]
----
https://<IP_CURRENT_HOST>:2380
----
+

> Using the `<ETCD_NAME>` of the current host, the correct IP can be found with the command:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The correct IP can be found from the `<ETCD_NAME>` of the current host, with the command:
```

Author: Ack.

+
.Example output
[source,terminal]
----
ETCD_NAME=<ETCD_NAME> && grep -A 1 "export NODE"  /etc/kubernetes/static-pod-resources/etcd-certs/configmaps/etcd-scripts/etcd.env | \
  grep -A 1 "$ETCD_NAME" | \
  grep "ETCD_URL_HOST" |  \
  sed -E 's/.*\"(.*)\"/\1/g'

> ----

Reviewer 2: ```
echo <ETCD_NAME> | sed -E 's/[.-]/_/g' | xargs -I {} grep {} /etc/kubernetes/static-pod-resources/etcd-certs/configmaps/etcd-scripts/etcd.env | grep -Po "(?<=IP=\").+(?=\")"
```

Author: Ack.

.. The value for `<ETCD_INITIAL_CLUSTER>` should be set like the following, where `<ETCD_NAME_n>` is the `<ETCD_NAME>` of each control plane host. 
+
[NOTE]
====
The port used here is 2380 and not 2379.
====
+
.Example output
[source,terminal]
----
<ETCD_NAME_0>=https://<IP_HOST_0>:2380,<ETCD_NAME_1>=https://<IP_HOST_1>:2380,<ETCD_NAME_2>=https://<IP_HOST_2>:2380
----
+

> This `<ETCD_INITIAL_CLUSTER>` value is the same for all control plane hosts.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This `<ETCD_INITIAL_CLUSTER>` value is the same for all control plane hosts, that is this very same value of <ETCD_INITIAL_CLUSTER> will be used in next steps on all the control plane hosts.
```

Author: Done

. Regenerate the etcd database from the backup.

> 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion

Such operation must be execute on each control plane host.

```

Author: Done

.. Copy the `etcd` backup to `/var/lib/etcd` directory with the command:
+
[source,terminal]
----
$ sudo cp /home/core/assets/backup/<snapshot_yyyy-mm-dd_hhmmss>.db /var/lib/etcd
----

> .. Start a new container which includes the `etcdctl` tool and use a plain `bash` entrypoint:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
.. Start a new container which includes the `etcdctl` tool and use a plain `bash` as entrypoint:
```

  --initial-cluster-token "openshift-etcd-<UUID>" \
  --initial-advertise-peer-urls "<ETCD_NODE_PEER_URL>" \
  --data-dir="/var/lib/etcd/restore-<UUID>" \
  --skip-hash-check=true
----
+
[NOTE]
====
The quotes are mandatory when regenerating the `etcd` database.
====

. Write down the values printed in the `added member` logs; for example:
+
.Example output
----
2022-06-28T19:52:43Z    info    membership/cluster.go:421   added member    {"cluster-id": "c5996b7c11c30d6b", "local-member-id": "0", "added-peer-id": "56cd73b614699e7", "added-peer-peer-urls": ["https://10.0.91.5:2380"], "added-peer-is-learner": false}
2022-06-28T19:52:43Z    info    membership/cluster.go:421   added member    {"cluster-id": "c5996b7c11c30d6b", "local-member-id": "0", "added-peer-id": "1f63d01b31bb9a9e", "added-peer-peer-urls": ["https://10.0.90.221:2380"], "added-peer-is-learner": false}
2022-06-28T19:52:43Z    info    membership/cluster.go:421   added member    {"cluster-id": "c5996b7c11c30d6b", "local-member-id": "0", "added-peer-id": "fdc2725b3b70127c", "added-peer-peer-urls": ["https://10.0.94.214:2380"], "added-peer-is-learner": false}
----
.. Exit from the container.

> .. Repeat these steps on all the control plane hosts, checking that the values printed in the added member logs are the same.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
.. Repeat these steps on the other control plane hosts, checking that the values printed in the `added member` logs are the same for all control plane hosts.
```

. Move the regenerated `etcd` database to the default location.

> 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion

Such operation must be executed on each control plane host.

```

Author: Done

.. Move the regenerated database (that is, the `member` folder created by the previous`etcdctl snapshot restore`) in the etcd default location `/var/lib/etcd`:
+
[source,terminal]
----
$ sudo mv /var/lib/etcd/restore-<UUID>/member /var/lib/etcd
----

.. Restore the SELinux context for `/var/lib/etcd/member` folder on `/var/lib/etcd` directory:
+
[source,terminal]
----
$ sudo restorecon -vR /var/lib/etcd/
----

.. Remove the leftover files and directories:
+
[source,terminal]
----
$ sudo rm -rf /var/lib/etcd/restore-<UUID>
----
+
[source,terminal]
----
$ sudo rm /var/lib/etcd/<snapshot_yyyy-mm-dd_hhmmss>.db
----
+

> In the end, `/var/lib/etcd` must contain only the folder `member`.

Reviewer 2: This is important, otherwise: https://access.redhat.com/solutions/6958920

Author: Done.

> .. Repeat these steps on all the control plane hosts.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
.. Repeat these steps on the other the control plane hosts.
```

|  https://10.0.92.74:2379 | 450bcf6999538512 |   3.5.0 |   67 MB |     false |      false |         2 |        218 |                218 |        |
| https://10.0.93.129:2379 | 358efa9c1d91c3d6 |   3.5.0 |   67 MB |     false |      false |         2 |        218 |                218 |        |
+--------------------------+------------------+---------+---------+-----------+------------+-----------+------------+--------------------+--------+
----

. Restart the other static pods.
+
The following steps must be executed on all control plane hosts, but one host at a time.

.. Move the Kubernetes API Server static pod manifest back to the kubelet manifest directory to make kubelet start the related containers with the command:
+
[source,terminal]
----
$ sudo mv /tmp/kube-apiserver-pod.yaml /etc/kubernetes/manifests
----

.. Verify that all the Kubernetes API Server containers have started:
+
[source,terminal]
----
$ sudo crictl ps | grep kube-apiserver | grep -v operator
----
+
[NOTE]
====
if the output of the following command is empty, wait a few minutes and check again.
====

> .. Repeat the same steps for `kube-controller-manager-pod.yaml` and `kube-scheduler-pod.yaml` files.

Reviewer 2: @palonsoro 
Should we also integrate OVN recovery ? (steps 12-14 of 
https://docs.openshift.com/container-platform/4.13/backup_and_restore/control_plane_backup_and_restore/disaster_recovery/scenario-2-restoring-cluster-state.html)

Author: @acancell-redhat Any update?

// Module included in the following assemblies:
//
// * disaster_recovery/scenario-2-manually-restoring-cluster-etcd-backup.adoc
// * post_installation_configuration/cluster-tasks.adoc

:_content-type: PROCEDURE

> [id="dr-scenario-2-manually-restoring-cluster-etcd-backup_{context}"]

Author: Ack.

> [id="dr-scenario-2-manually-restoring-cluster-etcd-backup_{context}"]

Author: Ack.

> = Restoring to a cluster from an etcd backup manually

Author: Ack.

> = Restoring to a cluster from an etcd backup manually

Author: Ack.

You can use a saved etcd backup to restore a previous cluster state or restore a cluster that has lost the majority of control plane hosts. 

> [NOTE]

Author: Sounds right. I will try to keep it as simple as possible.

====

> The standard restore procedure requires the complete recreation of 2 control plane nodes, which might be complex for clusters installed with UPI. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The standard restore procedure requires the complete recreation of 2 control plane nodes, which might be complex for clusters installed with UPI. 
```

> The standard restore procedure requires the complete recreation of 2 control plane nodes, which might be complex for clusters installed with UPI. 

Author: Ack.

> The standard restore procedure requires the complete recreation of 2 control plane nodes, which might be complex for clusters installed with UPI. The procedure described below only uses the already existing control plane nodes.

Author: Ack.

> The standard restore procedure requires the complete recreation of 2 control plane nodes, which might be complex for clusters installed with UPI. The procedure described below only uses the already existing control plane nodes.

Author: Ack.

====

[NOTE]
====

> If your cluster uses a control plane machine set, see "Troubleshooting the control plane machine set" for a more simple etcd recovery procedure.

Author: That would be better. I will rephrase the Introduction part.

> If your cluster uses a control plane machine set, see "Troubleshooting the control plane machine set" for a more simple etcd recovery procedure.

Author: Ack. I will reword the Introduction.

> If your cluster uses a control plane machine set, see "Troubleshooting the control plane machine set" for a more simple etcd recovery procedure.

Author: Ack.

====

[IMPORTANT]
====
When you restore your cluster, you must use an etcd backup that was taken from the same z-stream release. For example, an {product-title} 4.7.2 cluster must use an etcd backup that was taken from 4.7.2.
====

.Prerequisites

* Access to the cluster as a user with the `cluster-admin` role.
* A healthy control plane host to use as the recovery host.

> * SSH access to *all* control plane hosts, with the ability to switch to `root` user.

Reviewer 3: You might want to separate SSH access from `root` user in the list.

> * SSH access to *all* control plane hosts, with the ability to switch to `root` user.

Author: Will this be fine? 
* SSH access to _all_ control plane hosts.
* All control plane hosts can be accessed through SSH using the root user.

> * SSH access to *all* control plane hosts, with the ability to switch to `root` user.

Reviewer 3: You could do it that way, but I guess what I meant was:
SSH access to _all_ control plane hosts 
Root user permissions

> * SSH access to *all* control plane hosts, with the ability to switch to `root` user.

Author: As discussed. Let me rephrase the sentence to "SSH access to all control plane nodes through the root user."

> * A backup directory containing both the etcd snapshot and the resources for the static pods, which were from the same backup. The file names in the directory must be in the following formats: `snapshot_<datetimestamp>.db` and `static_kuberesources_<datetimestamp>.tar.gz`.

Author: Ack.

[IMPORTANT]
====

> For non-recovery control plane nodes, it is not required to establish SSH connectivity or to stop the static pods. You can delete and recreate other non-recovery, control plane machines, one by one.

Reviewer 2: Doesn't make sense in this document.
1. we _need_ access to _all_ control plane nodes
2. we are _not_ going to delete any control plane node

> For non-recovery control plane nodes, it is not required to establish SSH connectivity or to stop the static pods. You can delete and recreate other non-recovery, control plane machines, one by one.

Author: @acancell-redhat I will delete this part. Is there any caution that needs to be added here?

====

.Procedure

> . Select a control plane host to use as the recovery host. This is the host that you will run the restore operation on.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
. Select a control plane host to use as the recovery host. This is the host where you will run the the etcd database regeneration operation on.
```

Reviewer 2: The restore is applied in _all_ nodes, therefore the original wording might be misleading.

Author: How about, "Select a control plane host to use as the recovery host. This is the host where you run the etcd database regeneration operation on."?

Reviewer 2: Actually, after reviewing https://access.redhat.com/articles/6965021, I think there is no "main" recovery host _at all_.
The _Regenerate the etcd database from the backup_ step in the KCS is the same on all 3 control plane nodes.

Reviewer 2: I'd say that we might completely remove the mention of a "recovery host".
In this procedure, all nodes are equal (only at the end, when we restart the etcd static pods, we have a etcd leader)

Author: @acancell-redhat Instead of "recovery host" should I just mention "hosts"?

> . Establish SSH connectivity to each of the control plane nodes, including the recovery host.

Author: Ack.

+

> The Kubernetes API server becomes inaccessible after the restore process starts, so you cannot access the control plane nodes. For this reason, it is recommended to establish SSH connectivity to each control plane host in a separate terminal.

Author: Ack.

+
[IMPORTANT]
====
If you do not complete this step, you will not be able to access the control plane hosts to complete the restore procedure, and you will be unable to recover your cluster from this state.
====

. Copy the etcd backup directory to the recovery control plane host.
+
This procedure assumes that you copied the `backup` directory containing the etcd snapshot and the resources for the static pods to the `/home/core/` directory of your recovery control plane host.

> . Stop the static pods on all the control plane nodes, but one host at a time.

Author: Ack.

+
[NOTE]
====

> It is not required to manually stop the pods on the recovery host. The recovery script will stop the pods on the recovery host.

Reviewer 2: Nope.
Not manually stopping the static pods on the control plane node might mess with the etcd "regeneration" later.

> It is not required to manually stop the pods on the recovery host. The recovery script will stop the pods on the recovery host.

Author: I will delete this part as well.

====

> .. Access a control plane host that is not the recovery host.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
.. 
```

Reviewer 2: Should be deleted, since Not manually stopping the static pods on the control plane node might mess with the etcd "regeneration" later, and therefore at this step al 3 control plane nodes are to be considered identical.

Author: Done.

> .. Move the existing Kubernetes API Server static pod manifest out of the kubelet manifest directory

Author: Done.

+
[source,terminal]
----
$ sudo mv /etc/kubernetes/manifests/kube-apiserver-pod.yaml /tmp
----

> .. Verify that the Kubernetes API Server containers have stopped:

Author: Ack.

+
[source,terminal]
----
$ sudo crictl ps | grep kube-apiserver | grep -v "operator|gaurd"
----
+
The output of this command should be empty. If it is not empty, wait a few minutes and check again.

> .. If Kubernetes API Server containers haven't stopped yet, force their termination with:

Author: Ack.

+
[source,terminal]
----
$ sudo crictl stop <container_id>
----

> .. Repeat the same steps for `kube-controller-manager-pod.yaml`, `kube-scheduler-pod.yaml` and eventually `etcd-pod.yaml`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
.. Repeat the same steps for `kube-controller-manager-pod.yaml`, `kube-scheduler-pod.yaml` and eventually `etcd-pod.yaml`.
```
```suggestion
.. Repeat the same steps for `kube-controller-manager-pod.yaml`, `kube-scheduler-pod.yaml` and **eventually** `etcd-pod.yaml`.
```

Author: Ack.

> .. Repeat the same steps for `kube-controller-manager-pod.yaml`, `kube-scheduler-pod.yaml` and eventually `etcd-pod.yaml`.

Author: Ack.

.. On each control plane host, move the current `etcd` data into the `backup` folder:
+
[source,terminal]
----
$ sudo mv /var/lib/etcd/member /home/core/assets/backup/
----
+
This data will be useful in case the `etcd` backup restore doesn't work and the `etcd` cluster must be restored to the current state.

> . Find the correct etcd parameters for each control plane host

Author: Done

> .. The value for `<ETCD_NAME>` is related to the current host and it is equal to the value of the `ETCD_NAME` variable in the manifest `/etc/kubernetes/static-pod-resources/etcd-certs/configmaps/restore-etcd-pod/pod.yaml` in the current host. It can be found with:

Author: Ack.

+
[source,terminal]
----
$ grep -A 1 \
  $(grep 'export ETCD_NAME' /etc/kubernetes/static-pod-resources/etcd-certs/configmaps/restore-etcd-pod/pod.yaml | sed -E 's/.*\{(.*)\}/\1/g') \
  /etc/kubernetes/static-pod-resources/etcd-certs/configmaps/restore-etcd-pod/pod.yaml | \
  grep "value" | \
  sed -E 's/.*\"(.*)"/\1/g'
----

.. The value for `<UUID>` can be generated with the command:
+
[source,terminal]
----
$ uuidgen
----
+
[NOTE]
====

> Note that `<UUID>` must be generated only once and the same value must used on all the control plane hosts.

Author: Ack.

====

> .. The value for `ETCD_NODE_PEER_URL` should be like the following:

Author: Ack.

+
[source,yaml]
----
https://<IP_CURRENT_HOST>:2380
----
+

> The correct IP can be found with the following command, using the `<ETCD_NAME>` of the current host:

Author: Ack.

+

> .Example output

Reviewer 2: No, it shouldn't. It probably some leftover string.

> .Example output

Author: @acancell-redhat Should I delete the example output then?

> .Example output

Reviewer 2: Yes

[source,terminal]
----
ETCD_NAME=<ETCD_NAME> && grep -A 1 "export NODE"  /etc/kubernetes/static-pod-resources/etcd-certs/configmaps/etcd-scripts/etcd.env | \
  grep -A 1 "$ETCD_NAME" | \
  grep "ETCD_URL_HOST" |  \
  sed -E 's/.*\"(.*)\"/\1/g'
----

> .. The value for `<ETCD_INITIAL_CLUSTER>` should be like the following, where `<ETCD_NAME_n>` is the `<ETCD_NAME>` of each control plane host. 

Author: Done.

+
[NOTE]
====

> Note that the port used here is 2380 and not 2379.

Reviewer 2: @vwalek ^

> Note that the port used here is 2380 and not 2379.

Author: Any update from @vwalek?

> Note that the port used here is 2380 and not 2379.

Reviewer: >because the default port is 2379?
Actually, the etcd sets different ports than 2379/2380 as default. I think default is 4001. Nevertheless, it would be good to say that Kubernetes etcd instance configures ports 2380 for data exchange, 2379 for management. The port 2379 is added to etcd when it starts. 
Would be good to rephrase it as.

The port used in recovery must be 2380. (The port 2379 is used for `etcd` database management and is configured directly in `etcd` start command in container)

> Note that the port used here is 2380 and not 2379.

Author: @acancell-redhat as mentioned above, I will rephrase the sentence.

====
+

> .Sample output

Author: Done

[source,terminal]
----
<ETCD_NAME_0>=https://<IP_HOST_0>:2380,<ETCD_NAME_1>=https://<IP_HOST_1>:2380,<ETCD_NAME_2>=https://<IP_HOST_2>:2380
----
+
This `<ETCD_INITIAL_CLUSTER>` value is the same for all control plane hosts.

> . Regenerate the etcd database from the backup

Author: Done

> .. Copy the `etcd` backup to `/var/lib/etcd`:

Author: Going forward I will keep that in mind. Thank you.

+
[source,terminal]
----
$ sudo cp /home/core/assets/backup/<snapshot_yyyy-mm-dd_hhmmss>.db /var/lib/etcd
----

> .. Start a new container which includes the etcdctl tool and use a plain bash entrypoint:

Author: Done

+
[source,terminal]
----

> $ sudo podman run --rm --authfile=/var/lib/kubelet/config.json -it --entrypoint="/bin/bash" -v /var/lib/etcd:/var/lib/etcd:z registry.redhat.io/openshift4/ose-etcd:latest

Reviewer 2: We should also add the new additions from here: https://access.redhat.com/node/6965021/moderation/diff/view/23284287/23284288

> $ sudo podman run --rm --authfile=/var/lib/kubelet/config.json -it --entrypoint="/bin/bash" -v /var/lib/etcd:/var/lib/etcd:z registry.redhat.io/openshift4/ose-etcd:latest

Author: @acancell-redhat Can you please elaborate what have I missed? I have covered almost everything from the link. Please let me know what needs to be added.

> $ sudo podman run --rm --authfile=/var/lib/kubelet/config.json -it --entrypoint="/bin/bash" -v /var/lib/etcd:/var/lib/etcd:z registry.redhat.io/openshift4/ose-etcd:latest

Reviewer 2: @vwalek 
Should we use the container image from the current cluster release instead ?

> $ sudo podman run --rm --authfile=/var/lib/kubelet/config.json -it --entrypoint="/bin/bash" -v /var/lib/etcd:/var/lib/etcd:z registry.redhat.io/openshift4/ose-etcd:latest

Reviewer 2: From https://access.redhat.com/articles/6965021
_In case you can't pull the ose-etcd image, you can reuse the same image from the etcdctl container of the etcd pod. Run following commands._
```
crictl ps -a | grep etcdctl | awk '{print $2}'
podman run --rm -it --entrypoint="/bin/bash" -v /var/lib/etcd:/var/lib/etcd:z <image-hash>
```

> $ sudo podman run --rm --authfile=/var/lib/kubelet/config.json -it --entrypoint="/bin/bash" -v /var/lib/etcd:/var/lib/etcd:z registry.redhat.io/openshift4/ose-etcd:latest

Reviewer 2: @vwalek
Should we use the container image from the current cluster release instead ?
Note that at this point oc adm release info is not available.

> $ sudo podman run --rm --authfile=/var/lib/kubelet/config.json -it --entrypoint="/bin/bash" -v /var/lib/etcd:/var/lib/etcd:z registry.redhat.io/openshift4/ose-etcd:latest

Author: > From https://access.redhat.com/articles/6965021 _In case you can't pull the ose-etcd image, you can reuse the same image from the etcdctl container of the etcd pod. Run following commands._
> 
> ```
> crictl ps -a | grep etcdctl | awk '{print $2}'
> podman run --rm -it --entrypoint="/bin/bash" -v /var/lib/etcd:/var/lib/etcd:z <image-hash>
> ```

Added the step.

> $ sudo podman run --rm --authfile=/var/lib/kubelet/config.json -it --entrypoint="/bin/bash" -v /var/lib/etcd:/var/lib/etcd:z registry.redhat.io/openshift4/ose-etcd:latest

Reviewer 2: @vwalek 
is it possible to use `:Z` instead of `:z` ?
Also: what about the `:latest` tag ?

----

> .. Check that the version of the `etcdctl` tool is >= the version of theetcd server where the backup was created:

Author: Done.

+
[source,terminal]
----
$ sudo etcdctl version
----

> .. Run the command to regenerate the etcd database, using the correct values for the current host. 

Author: Ack.

+
[source,terminal]
----
$ sudo ETCDCTL_API=3 /usr/bin/etcdctl snapshot restore /var/lib/etcd/<snapshot_yyyy-mm-dd_hhmmss>.db \
  --name "<ETCD_NAME>" \
  --initial-cluster="<ETCD_INITIAL_CLUSTER>" \
  --initial-cluster-token "openshift-etcd-<UUID>" \
  --initial-advertise-peer-urls "<ETCD_NODE_PEER_URL>" \
  --data-dir="/var/lib/etcd/restore-<UUID>" \
  --skip-hash-check=true
----
+
[NOTE]
====

> Note the the quotes are mandatory here.

Reviewer 2: We should also add the new additions from here: https://access.redhat.com/node/6965021/moderation/diff/view/23130153/23284287

> Note the the quotes are mandatory here.

Author: @JoeAldinger can you elaborate what exactly needs to be added. I checked the link, but I have already added all the content.

> Note the the quotes are mandatory here.

Reviewer 2: The link shows an additional param:
```
 --skip-hash-check=true
```

====

> . Write down the values printed in the added member logs; for example:

Author: @acancell-redhat can you ptal?

> . Write down the values printed in the added member logs; for example:

Reviewer 2: @subhtk 
All the
```
 {"cluster-id": "xxx", "local-member-id": "n", "added-peer-id": "yyy", "added-peer-peer-urls": ["https://x.x.x.x:2380"], "added-peer-is-learner": false}
```
to be compared with the output of `crictl exec -it $(crictl ps | grep etcdctl | awk '{print $1}') etcdctl endpoint status -w table` in the related step.

+
.Example output
----
2022-06-28T19:52:43Z    info    membership/cluster.go:421   added member    {"cluster-id": "c5996b7c11c30d6b", "local-member-id": "0", "added-peer-id": "56cd73b614699e7", "added-peer-peer-urls": ["https://10.0.91.5:2380"], "added-peer-is-learner": false}
2022-06-28T19:52:43Z    info    membership/cluster.go:421   added member    {"cluster-id": "c5996b7c11c30d6b", "local-member-id": "0", "added-peer-id": "1f63d01b31bb9a9e", "added-peer-peer-urls": ["https://10.0.90.221:2380"], "added-peer-is-learner": false}
2022-06-28T19:52:43Z    info    membership/cluster.go:421   added member    {"cluster-id": "c5996b7c11c30d6b", "local-member-id": "0", "added-peer-id": "fdc2725b3b70127c", "added-peer-peer-urls": ["https://10.0.94.214:2380"], "added-peer-is-learner": false}
----
.. Exit from the container.

> .. Repeat these steps on all the control plane hosts, checking that the values printed in the added member logs are the same.

Reviewer 2: From step **6i** (_Copy the etcd backup to /var/lib/etcd:_)

> .. Repeat these steps on all the control plane hosts, checking that the values printed in the added member logs are the same.

Author: @JoeAldinger Should I mention :- "Repeat the above steps on all the control plane hosts, checking that the values printed in the added member logs are the same. "
or
"Repeat the steps, that is, from "copy the `etcd` backup to `var/lib/etcd`", on all the control plane hosts, checking that the values printed in the added member logs are the same."

> .. Repeat these steps on all the control plane hosts, checking that the values printed in the added member logs are the same.

Reviewer 3: @subhtk I like the first option better than the second. I think it is cleaner.

> .. Repeat these steps on all the control plane hosts, checking that the values printed in the added member logs are the same.

Author: Ack.

> . Move the regenerated etcd database to the default location.

Author: Ack.

> .. Move the regenerated database (that is, the `member` folder) in the etcd default location `/var/lib/etcd`:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
.. Move the regenerated database (that is, the `member` folder created by the previous`etcdctl snapshot restore`) in the etcd default location `/var/lib/etcd`:
```

Reviewer 2: Is it more clear this way ?

Author: Yes, this is actually better than before.

> .. Move the regenerated database (that is, the `member` folder) in the etcd default location `/var/lib/etcd`:

Author: Yes. Would this be fine:- "Move the regenerated database (that is, the `member` folder) in the `etcd` default location `/var/lib/etcd` directory from `var/lib/etcd/restore` with the command:

+
[source,terminal]
----
$ sudo mv /var/lib/etcd/restore-<UUID>/member /var/lib/etcd
----

> .. Restore the SELinux context for `/var/lib/etcd/member` on `/var/lib/etcd`:

Author: Yes. Changed accordingly.

+
[source,terminal]
----
$ sudo restorecon -vR /var/lib/etcd/
----

> .. Remove the leftovers files and directories:

Author: Done

+
[source,terminal]
----

> $ sudo rm -rf /var/lib/etcd/restore-<UUID>

Author: Ack.

$ sudo rm /var/lib/etcd/<snapshot_yyyy-mm-dd_hhmmss>.db
----
+

> In the end, `/var/lib/etcd` must contain only the folder `member`.

Author: Ack.

.. Repeat these steps on all the control plane hosts.

. Restart the etcd cluster.

> .. The following steps must be executed on all control plane hosts, but one host at a time.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
.. The following steps must be executed on all control plane hosts, but **one host at a time**.
```

Reviewer 2: This should be stressed.

Author: Done.

.. Move the `etcd` static pod manifest back to the kubelet manifest directory, in order to make kubelet start the related containers :
+
[source,terminal]
----
$ sudo mv /tmp/etcd-pod.yaml /etc/kubernetes/manifests
----

.. Verify that all the `etcd` containers have started:
+
[source,terminal]
----

> crictl ps | grep etcd | grep -v operator

Author: Ack.

----
+
.Example output
[source,terminal]
----
38c814767ad983       f79db5a8799fd2c08960ad9ee22f784b9fbe23babe008e8a3bf68323f004c840                                                         28 seconds ago       Running             etcd-health-monitor                   2                   fe4b9c3d6483c
e1646b15207c6       9d28c15860870e85c91d0e36b45f7a6edd3da757b113ec4abb4507df88b17f06                                                         About a minute ago   Running             etcd-metrics                          0                   fe4b9c3d6483c
08ba29b1f58a7       9d28c15860870e85c91d0e36b45f7a6edd3da757b113ec4abb4507df88b17f06                                                         About a minute ago   Running             etcd                                  0                   fe4b9c3d6483c
2ddc9eda16f53       9d28c15860870e85c91d0e36b45f7a6edd3da757b113ec4abb4507df88b17f06                                                         About a minute ago   Running             etcdctl    
----
+

> If the output of the following command is empty, wait a few minutes and check again

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
If the output of the following command is empty, wait a few minutes and check again.
```

Author: Done.

> . Check the status of the etcd cluster.

Reviewer 3: I would be consistent with how you are using [backticks](https://github.com/openshift/openshift-docs/blob/main/contributing_to_docs/doc_guidelines.adoc#quick-markup-reference) with etcd. For example, in line 239 and 268 you aren't using them, but then you use them in line 270. I did a quick search of the repo and see that etcd cluster has been used without markup.

Author: For this I actually followed this particular resource, https://access.redhat.com/node/6965021/moderation/diff/view/23130153/23284287. Wherever the backtick was provided, I added them in here as well.

Author: And the it appears to be a step kind of heading here so I did not use backticks for etcd.

Reviewer 3: Steps and headings are different. Although you are correct if this is a heading it would not get markup. I suppose my larger point is just make sure that you are using backticks consistently.

Author: Yes, I will follow the same.

[source,terminal]
----
+--------------------------+------------------+---------+---------+-----------+------------+-----------+------------+--------------------+--------+
|         ENDPOINT         |        ID        | VERSION | DB SIZE | IS LEADER | IS LEARNER | RAFT TERM | RAFT INDEX | RAFT APPLIED INDEX | ERRORS |
+--------------------------+------------------+---------+---------+-----------+------------+-----------+------------+--------------------+--------+
| https://10.0.89.133:2379 | 682e4a83a0cec6c0 |   3.5.0 |   67 MB |      true |      false |         2 |        218 |                218 |        |
|  https://10.0.92.74:2379 | 450bcf6999538512 |   3.5.0 |   67 MB |     false |      false |         2 |        218 |                218 |        |
| https://10.0.93.129:2379 | 358efa9c1d91c3d6 |   3.5.0 |   67 MB |     false |      false |         2 |        218 |                218 |        |
+--------------------------+------------------+---------+---------+-----------+------------+-----------+------------+--------------------+--------+
----

. Restart the other static pods.
+
The following steps must be executed on all control plane hosts, but one host at a time.

> .. Move the Kubernetes API Server static pod manifest back to the kubelet manifest directory, in order to make kubelet start the related containers :

Author: Done.

+
[source,terminal]
----
$ sudo mv /tmp/kube-apiserver-pod.yaml /etc/kubernetes/manifests
----

.. Verify that all the Kubernetes API Server containers have started:
+
[source,terminal]
----
$ sudo crictl ps | grep kube-apiserver | grep -v operator
----
+

> [NOTE]

Reviewer 3: I don't think this needs to be a note. For example, line 266 has this phrase as an indent portion of the step.

Author: Ack.

====
if the output of the following command is empty, wait a few minutes and check again.
====

> .. Repeat the same steps for `kube-controller-manager-pod.yaml` and `kube-scheduler-pod.yaml`.

Reviewer 3: I'd specify the steps you'd like the user to repeat.

> .. Repeat the same steps for `kube-controller-manager-pod.yaml` and `kube-scheduler-pod.yaml`.

Reviewer 2: Both step **11i** and **11ii**

> .. Repeat the same steps for `kube-controller-manager-pod.yaml` and `kube-scheduler-pod.yaml`.

Author: @JoeAldinger Can you help me out how I can add the reference here for those steps? Let me know for the above comment related to the same, I will change here accordingly?

> .. Repeat the same steps for `kube-controller-manager-pod.yaml` and `kube-scheduler-pod.yaml`.

Reviewer 3: After re-reading, I think this might be ok to say same step steps because "repeat the same steps..." is nested under 11. You could ask another peer-reviewer what they thought too just to be safe if you wanted.

.Procedure

. Use SSH to connect to each of the control plane nodes.
+
The Kubernetes API server becomes inaccessible after the restore process starts, so you cannot access the control plane nodes. For this reason, it is recommended to use a SSH connection for each control plane host you are accessing in a separate terminal.
+
[IMPORTANT]
====
If you do not complete this step, you will not be able to access the control plane hosts to complete the restore procedure, and you will be unable to recover your cluster from this state.
====

. Copy the etcd backup directory to each control plane host.
+
This procedure assumes that you copied the `backup` directory containing the etcd snapshot and the resources for the static pods to the `/home/core/assets` directory of each control plane host. You might need to create such `assets` folder if it doesn't exist yet.

. Stop the static pods on all the control plane nodes; one host at a time.

.. Move the existing Kubernetes API Server static pod manifest out of the kubelet manifest directory.
+
[source,terminal]
----

> $ sudo mv /etc/kubernetes/manifests/kube-apiserver-pod.yaml /tmp

Author: Should I remove sudo from everywhere in the module?

> $ sudo mv /etc/kubernetes/manifests/kube-apiserver-pod.yaml /tmp

Reviewer 4: Yes, We need to make it clear that we must run the steps as the `root` user, then remove `sudo` from everywhere (because we are already root).

====

.. The value for `ETCD_NODE_PEER_URL` should be set like the following example:
+
[source,yaml]
----
https://<IP_CURRENT_HOST>:2380
----
+
The correct IP can be found from the `<ETCD_NAME>` of the specific control plane host, with the command:
+
[source,terminal]
----
$ echo <ETCD_NAME> | \
  sed -E 's/[.-]/_/g' | \
  xargs -I {} grep {} /etc/kubernetes/static-pod-resources/etcd-certs/configmaps/etcd-scripts/etcd.env | \
  grep "IP" | grep -Po '(?<=").+(?=")'
----

.. The value for `<ETCD_INITIAL_CLUSTER>` should be set like the following, where `<ETCD_NAME_n>` is the `<ETCD_NAME>` of each control plane host. 
+
[NOTE]
====
The port used must be 2380 and not 2379. The port 2379 is used for etcd database management and is configured directly in etcd start command in container.
====
+
.Example output
[source,terminal]
----
<ETCD_NAME_0>=https://<IP_HOST_0>:2380,<ETCD_NAME_1>=https://<IP_HOST_1>:2380,<ETCD_NAME_2>=https://<IP_HOST_2>:2380

> ----

Author: Done

+
This `<ETCD_INITIAL_CLUSTER>` value is the same for all control plane hosts, that is this very same value of <ETCD_INITIAL_CLUSTER> will be used in next steps on all the control plane hosts.

. Regenerate the etcd database from the backup.

Such operation must be executed on each control plane host.

.. Copy the `etcd` backup to `/var/lib/etcd` directory with the command:
+
[source,terminal]
----
$ sudo cp /home/core/assets/backup/<snapshot_yyyy-mm-dd_hhmmss>.db /var/lib/etcd
----

.. Start a new container which includes the `etcdctl` tool and use `bash` as entrypoint:
+
[source,terminal]
----
$ sudo podman run --rm --authfile=/var/lib/kubelet/config.json -it --entrypoint="/bin/bash" -v /var/lib/etcd:/var/lib/etcd:z registry.redhat.io/openshift4/ose-etcd:latest
----

.. In case you can't pull the ose-etcd image, you can reuse the same image from the etcdctl container of the etcd pod. Run following commands.

[source,terminal]
----

> $ crictl ps -a | grep etcdctl | awk '{print $2}'

Author: How about this:
.. If you cannot pull the ose-etcd image, retrieve the image from the backup of the pod manifest instead. Run the following commands:
+
[source,terminal]
----
$ jq -r '.spec.containers[]|select(.name=="etcdctl")|.image' /root/manifests-backup/etcd-pod.yaml
----

And should I remove this command- `$ podman run --rm -it --entrypoint="/bin/bash" -v /var/lib/etcd:/var/lib/etcd:z <image-hash>`

> $ crictl ps -a | grep etcdctl | awk '{print $2}'

Reviewer 4: Nope. We need to first use the `jq -r (...)` command to find out the image and then pull **that** image. Not doing so can lead to issues, like:
- Disconnected image not properly mirrored
- Too old image not properly mirrored
- Regressions or unforeseen issues for not using the same etcdctl version than the one deployed in the cluster.

So please modify it to use the jq command only. For clarity, I'll just add the comment to this on top of current text on my next revision.

  sed -E 's/[.-]/_/g' | \
  xargs -I {} grep {} /etc/kubernetes/static-pod-resources/etcd-certs/configmaps/etcd-scripts/etcd.env | \
  grep "IP" | grep -Po '(?<=").+(?=")'
----

.. The value for `<ETCD_INITIAL_CLUSTER>` should be set like the following, where `<ETCD_NAME_n>` is the `<ETCD_NAME>` of each control plane host. 
+
[NOTE]
====
The port used must be 2380 and not 2379. The port 2379 is used for etcd database management and is configured directly in etcd start command in container.
====
+
.Example output
[source,terminal]
----
<ETCD_NAME_0>=<ETCD_NODE_PEER_URL_0>,<ETCD_NAME_1>=<ETCD_NODE_PEER_URL_1>,<ETCD_NAME_2>=<ETCD_NODE_PEER_URL_2> <1>
----
<1> Specifies the `ETCD_NODE_PEER_URL` values from each control plane host.
+
The `<ETCD_INITIAL_CLUSTER>` value remains same across all control plane hosts. The same value is required in the next steps on every control plane host.

. Regenerate the etcd database from the backup. 
+
Such operation must be executed on each control plane host.

.. Copy the `etcd` backup to `/var/lib/etcd` directory with the command:
+
[source,terminal]
----
$ cp /home/core/assets/backup/<snapshot_yyyy-mm-dd_hhmmss>.db /var/lib/etcd
----

> .. In case you cannot pull the `ose-etcd` image, identify the correct `etcdctl` image before proceeding. Use the following command to retrieve the image from the backup of the pod manifest:

Reviewer 4: Please remove "In case you cannot pull the `ose-etcd` image, " so that the sentence just starts like "Identify the correct `etcdctl` image..."

e1646b15207c6       9d28c15860870e85c91d0e36b45f7a6edd3da757b113ec4abb4507df88b17f06                                                         About a minute ago   Running             etcd-metrics                          0                   fe4b9c3d6483c
08ba29b1f58a7       9d28c15860870e85c91d0e36b45f7a6edd3da757b113ec4abb4507df88b17f06                                                         About a minute ago   Running             etcd                                  0                   fe4b9c3d6483c
2ddc9eda16f53       9d28c15860870e85c91d0e36b45f7a6edd3da757b113ec4abb4507df88b17f06                                                         About a minute ago   Running             etcdctl    
----
+
If the output of this command is empty, wait a few minutes and check again.

. Check the status of the `etcd` cluster.

.. On any of the control plane hosts, check the status of the `etcd` cluster with the following command:
+
[source,terminal]
----

> $ sudo crictl exec -it $(crictl ps | grep etcdctl | awk '{print $1}') etcdctl endpoint status -w table

Reviewer 4: Please remove sudo.

.. Move the Kubernetes API Server static pod manifest back to the kubelet manifest directory to make kubelet start the related containers with the command:
+
[source,terminal]
----
$ mv /root/manifests-backup/kube-apiserver-pod.yaml /etc/kubernetes/manifests
----

.. Verify that all the Kubernetes API Server containers have started:
+
[source,terminal]
----
$ crictl ps | grep kube-apiserver | grep -v operator
----
+
[NOTE]
====
if the output of the following command is empty, wait a few minutes and check again.
====

.. Repeat the same steps for `kube-controller-manager-pod.yaml` and `kube-scheduler-pod.yaml` files.

... Restart the kubelets in all nodes using the following command:
+
[source,terminal]
----
$ systemctl restart kubelet
----

... Start the remaining control plane pods using the following command:
+
[source,terminal]
----
$ mv /root/manifests-backup/kube-* /etc/kubernetes/manifests/
----

... Check if the `kube-apiserver`, `kube-scheduler` and `kube-controller-manager` pods start correctly:
+
[source,terminal]
----
$ crictl ps | grep -E 'kube-(apiserver|scheduler|controller-manager)' | grep -v -E 'operator|guard'
----

> ... Wipe the databases using the following commands:

Reviewer 4: Please say "Wipe the OVN databases", so we specify these are the OVN databases.

+
[source,terminal]
----
$ (oc get node -o name | sed 's:node/::g')
do 
$ oc debug node/${NODE} -- chroot /host /bin/bash -c  'rm -f /var/lib/ovn-ic/etc/ovn*.db && systemctl restart ovs-vswitchd ovsdb-server'
$ oc -n openshift-ovn-kubernetes delete pod -l app=ovnkube-node --field-selector=spec.nodeName=${NODE} --wait

> $ oc -n openshift-ovn-kubernetes wait pod -l app=ovnkube-node --field-selector=spec.nodeName=${NODE} --for condition=ContainersReady --timeout=600s

Reviewer 4: Not sure why/how I haven't seen this before (or maybe there was some problem during past commits), but there are mistakes for this.

Please replace the box contents by the following:
```
for NODE in  $(oc get node -o name | sed 's:node/::g')
do 
  oc debug node/${NODE} -- chroot /host /bin/bash -c  'rm -f /var/lib/ovn-ic/etc/ovn*.db && systemctl restart ovs-vswitchd ovsdb-server'
  oc -n openshift-ovn-kubernetes delete pod -l app=ovnkube-node --field-selector=spec.nodeName=${NODE} --wait
  oc -n openshift-ovn-kubernetes wait pod -l app=ovnkube-node --field-selector=spec.nodeName=${NODE} --for condition=ContainersReady --timeout=600s
done
```

**IMPORTANT**: Do not modify what I wrote above. Not even with the intent to perform any style adaptation or improvement (doing so might be what made it wrong previously, not sure). 

The snippet I wrote is to be copy-pasted as-is at one shot in a terminal (i.e. you copy all its lines and just paste them as-is). Maybe you can just explain it, as you see it best.

----
+
The output of this command should be empty. If it is not empty, wait a few minutes and check again.

.. If Kubernetes API Server containers haven't stopped yet, force their termination with the command:
+
[source,terminal]
----
$ crictl stop <container_id>
----

.. Repeat the same steps for `kube-controller-manager-pod.yaml`, `kube-scheduler-pod.yaml` and **eventually** `etcd-pod.yaml`.

... Stop the `kube-controller-manager` pod with the following command:
+
[source,terminal]
----
$ mv /etc/kubernetes/manifests/kube-controller-manager-pod.yaml /root/manifests-backup/
----

... Check if the containers are stopped using the following command:
+
[source,terminal]
----
$ crictl ps | grep kube-controller-manager | grep -E -v "operator|guard"
----

... Stop the `kube-scheduler` pod using the following command:
+
[source,terminal]
----
$ mv /etc/kubernetes/manifests/kube-scheduler-pod.yaml /root/manifests-backup/
----

... Check if the containers are stopped using the following command:
+
[source,terminal]
----
$ crictl ps | grep kube-scheduler | grep -E -v "operator|guard"
----

... Stop the `etcd` pod using the following command:
+
[source,terminal]
----

> $ crictl ps | grep kube-scheduler | grep -E -v "operator|guard"

Reviewer 4: This command is wrong. It should be
```
$ mv /etc/kubernetes/manifests/etcd-pod.yaml /root/manifests-backup/
```

----

... Check if the containers are stopped using the following command:
+
[source,terminal]
----
$ crictl ps | grep etcd | grep -E -v "operator|guard"
----

. On each control plane host, save the current `etcd` data, by moving it into the `backup` folder:
+
[source,terminal]
----

> $ mv /var/lib/etcd/member /home/core/assets/backup/

Reviewer 4: This should be replaced by:
```
$ mkdir /home/core/assets/old-member-data
$ mv /var/lib/etcd/member /home/core/assets/old-member-data
```
Otherwise, we risk to mix (or even overwrite) our desired backup with the current content of the etcd members

----
+
This data will be useful in case the `etcd` backup restore doesn't work and the `etcd` cluster must be restored to the current state.

. Find the correct etcd parameters for each control plane host.

.. The value for `<ETCD_NAME>` is unique for the each control plane host, and it is equal to the value of the `ETCD_NAME` variable in the manifest `/etc/kubernetes/static-pod-resources/etcd-certs/configmaps/restore-etcd-pod/pod.yaml` file in the specific control plane host. It can be found with the command:
+
[source,terminal]
----
RESTORE_ETCD_POD_YAML="/etc/kubernetes/static-pod-resources/etcd-certs/configmaps/restore-etcd-pod/pod.yaml"
cat $RESTORE_ETCD_POD_YAML | \
  grep -A 1 $(cat $RESTORE_ETCD_POD_YAML | grep 'export ETCD_NAME' | grep -Eo 'NODE_.+_ETCD_NAME') | \
  grep -Po '(?<=value: ").+(?=")'
----

.. The value for `<UUID>` can be generated in a control plane host with the command:
+
[source,terminal]
----
$ uuidgen
----
+
[NOTE]
====

> The value for `<UUID>` must be generated only once, that is, after generating it on one control plane host it doesn't need to be generated also on the other ones; the very same value of <UUID> will be used in next steps on all the control plane hosts.

Reviewer 4: `<UUID>` should have the code syntax in all its occurrences of this paragraph.

// Module included in the following assemblies:
//
// * disaster_recovery/scenario-2-manually-restoring-cluster-etcd-backup.adoc
// * post_installation_configuration/cluster-tasks.adoc

:_content-type: PROCEDURE
[id="manually-restoring-cluster-etcd-backup_{context}"]
= Restoring a cluster manually from an etcd backup

> The restore procedure described on the section "Restoring to a previous cluster state": 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The restore procedure described in the section "Restoring to a previous cluster state": 
```
